# Linking vertebral trabecular microstructure variation to hominoid locomotion, Part I: Homo sapiens

## Introduction

Human (Homo sapiens) bipedalism is unique among the extant taxa of the primate order. Locomotory differences among hominoid taxa have myriad structural and biomechanical correlates, ranging from the macro to the micro-scale. One of the unique macroscopic anatomical features of human bipedalism is the lordotic curve of the lumbar spine. Interestingly, the trabecular microstructure of lumbar vertebral centra has not been studied previously using micro-computed tomography (microCT), or at least not from a comparative, inter-specific perspective. This study research uses microCT to investigate the trabecular microstructure of the lumbar vertebral bodies of Homo sapiens to quantitatively assess the relationship between our taxon’s obligate bipedalism and the vertebral trabecular microstructure of the lumbar region. We posit that significant differences between the anterior and posterior portions of lumbar vertebral centra could potentially be a consequence of bipedalism. Identification of such differences could be useful in identifying and characterizing the degree of bipedalism in ancient hominin taxa. 

## Background

Myriad studies have examined the anatomical correlates of human obligate bipedalism, and the spine has received particular attention in this regard. This research builds upon past studies like (Smit 1997) and (Plomp 2019) that have put an emphasis on the importance of the lumbar region as it pertains to the evolution of bipedal locomotion, and which have suggested different areas within the vertebra that may be affected by the transition to this mode of locomotion in the hominin lineage. In particular, the vertebral body has been mentioned as being of particular interest given the differences in its biomechanical role across hominid taxa. The posterior portions of lumbar vertebrae are subject to more extension and shear forces than the anterior portions of our spine. Extension forces occur when the spine is bent backward. This movement puts more stress on the posterior elements of the spine. Shear forces can also affect the posterior portions of the spine more than the anterior portions. This is because the posterior elements are responsible for providing stability and preventing excessive movement between adjacent vertebrae. Walking upright generates extension forces as the trunk moves forward and backward with each step. It also generates shear forces as a result of of the forward and backward movement of the hips and the rotation of the pelvis. These forces cause the vertebrae to slide or shift against each other. The spine also endures torsion and compression forces while walking upright. The dorsal wedging of lumbar vertebral bodies that produces lumbar lordosis in humans/hominins should have microanatomical consequences that differentiate the anterior and posterior portions of human lumbar centra.

## Research question
 
Will the posterior section of the third lumbar vertebra of humans (Homo sapiens) be significantly different in biomechanical properties form corresponding anterior sections of the same individual/vertebra as a result of lumbar lordosis and, ultimately, bipedalism? The central research question of the broader project of which the present work forms a part aims to elucidate in detail the patterns of differences in the trabecular microstructure of lumbar vertebra among Homo sapiens, Pan troglodytes*, and Australopithecus africanus* that may have emerged as a consequence of the locomotive differences among these taxa.
																																*if possible
## Hypotheses 
 
H0: Posterior and anterior portions of human third lumbar vertebrae will not differ in terms of their trabecular number, trabecular thickness, trabecular connectivity density, or degree of anisotropy.
 
Ha: Posterior and anterior portions of human third lumbar vertebrae will differ in terms of their trabecular number, trabecular thickness, trabecular connectivity density, and degree of anisotropy, with the posterior having more numerous, thicker, and more connected trabeculae while also exhibiting more anisotropy, with greater bone density in a superior-inferior dimension because of the loads placed on the posterior portion of lumbar vertebral centra during locomotion.

## Materials and Methods

Non-destructive microCT scanning of vertebrae was performed using a Bruker SkyscanTM 1273 in the ​Department Of  Civil, Architectural And Environmental Engineering, College of Engineering, University of Miami. We scanned 15 human third lumbar vertebrae drawn from the osteological teaching collection of the University of Miami’s Department of Anthropology. No data pertaining to biological profile (age, sex) were available for these individuals, although we did perform a relative age assessment of the spinal column of each individual (see below).
 
Individual vertebra were scanned using a voltage of 90 KV, a current of 166 μA, and a 1 mm aluminum filter. Use of a “medium” focal size and 3072 x 1944 scan resolution resulted in individual 20 μm isometric voxels. Samples were rotated 0.2 degrees and would take 15 frames . Using the analytical software CTanTM, we defined the anterior and posterior volumes of interest (VOIs) as follows. We first measured the length of the vertebra in the antero-posterior plane and divided that length by two to find the sagittal/horizontal center of each vertebral body. To find the transverse/vertical center we measured the height of the vertebra at the previously defined sagittal/horizontal center and again divided by two. Having thus defined the sagittal and transverse midplanes of each sample, we established a VOI (volume of interest) that extended 5 mm superiorly and inferiorly from that center point, making the total height of the area we will be analyzing 10mm. We  then clicked on the center of the VOI so that the cross section appeared on a separate pane. In this new pane is where we selected the shape and size of our ROI’s (regions of interest). We selected two rectangular sections placed anteriorly and posteriorly, both 15mm in width by 5mm in height. We continued to run the analysis of these two sections for all our samples.  
 
CTAnTM generates data on around 40 different parameters, all of which potentially may be of interest but, in the current work, we focus in particular on the following four: trabecular number, trabecular thickness, trabecular connectivity density, and degree of anisotropy.
 
To control for the effects of biological age, we conducted a relative age assessment of the entire vertebral column of each individual. We examined all 15 L3s one by one and used. We looked at the superior and inferior areas of the body and scored them from 0-3 based on signs of lipping. Then we also looked at the left superior process, right superior process, left inferior process, and right inferior process. We scored these on a scale from 0-3, looking at eburnation, porosity and lipping. 0 in both scales is unobservable to 3 being highly observable.

## Results
 
microCT analysis of n=15 Homo sapiens’ third lumbar vertebrae found that, controlling for individual age, there were systematic differences in trabecular number, trabecular thickness, trabecular connectivity density, and degree of anisotropy between anterior and posterior volumes-of-interest (VOI) of lumbar vertebral centra. On an individual-by-individual basis, posterior regions of the lumbar body had uniformly fewer trabecula (averaging 0.1±0.1 fewer trabecula/mm, or a 9.8% reduction), thicker trabecula (24.4±24.4 μm thicker, a 16.6% increase), higher connectivity density (0.86±0.65 more connections/ mm3, or 41.5% more), and were more isotropic (by 35.6±9.7%) than anterior VOIs.

## Discussion/conclusions
 
Besides providing proof-of-concept for the approach, the present work identified systematic differences in the biomechanical character of anterior and posterior sections of human third lumbar vertebrae. Based on the principle of Wolff’s Law and prior studies, we conclude that these differences are likely the result of different loading factors and biomechanical responses that have evolved as a consequence of human lumbar lordosis.

## Next steps

Future planned steps in our research include the analysis of additional taxa (e.g., Pan troglodytes, Australopithecus sp.). Expanding our study sample will illuminate the relationship between locomotion and vertebral microstructure across these evolutionarily related taxa and expand our knowledge of the micro-anatomical correlates of locomotion, in particular those associated with the transition to bipedalism in hominin evolution. 

